[FLINK-31889] Add documentation for implementing/loading enrichers (#22468)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/deployment/advanced/failure_enrichers.md

{{< /hint >}}

FailureEnricherFactory example:

``` java
public class TestFailureEnricherFactory implements FailureEnricherFactory {

   @Override
   public FailureEnricher createFailureEnricher(Configuration conf) {
        return new CustomEnricher();
   }
}
```

FailureEnricher example:

``` java
public class CustomEnricher implements FailureEnricher {
    private final Set<String> outputKeys;
    
    public CustomEnricher() {
        this.outputKeys = Collections.singleton("labelKey");
    }

    @Override
    public Set<String> getOutputKeys() {
        return outputKeys;
    }

    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<Map<String, String>> processFailure(
            Throwable cause, Context context) {
        return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(Collections.singletonMap("labelKey", "labelValue"));
    }
}
```

### Configuration

The JobManager loads FailureEnricher plugins at startup. To make sure your FailureEnrichers are loaded all class names should be defined as part of [jobmanager.failure-enrichers configuration]({{< ref "docs/deployment/config#jobmanager-failure-enrichers" >}}).
  If this configuration is empty, NO enrichers will be started. Example:
```

>     jobmanager.failure-enrichers = org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher

Reviewer: side-note: If multiple enrichers are used this option can become a bit cumbersome for users, and a structure like we use for metrics reporters could've solved that (and paved a way to make them configurable!)

```
jobmanager.failure-enrichers.enricher1.class = org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher
```

>     jobmanager.failure-enrichers = org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher

Reviewer: Is it correct that you configure the enricher itself, and not the factory? How does the factory lookup work? Do we just load all factories, have them all instantiate the enricher and do classname checks to find the right one...?

Reviewer: Oh my it does work like that :(

Better hope the enrichers don't setup any resources in their constructor :/

Author: So what you are implying here is by filtering on the Factory level we could avoid instantiating unwanted enrichers that could be potentialy setting up resources? 

Happy to add that as a followup ticket and follow an approach similar to MetricsReporter setup

---
title: "Failure Enrichers"
nav-title: failure-enrichers
nav-parent_id: advanced
nav-pos: 3
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

## Custom failure enrichers

> Flink provides a pluggable interface for users to register their custom logic and enrich failures with extra metadata labels (string kv pairs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink provides a pluggable interface for users to register their custom logic and enrich failures with extra metadata labels (string key-value pairs).
```

> The goal is to enable developers implement their own failure enrichment plugins to categorize job failures, expose custom metrics, make calls to external notification systems, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables users to implement their own failure enrichment plugins to categorize job failures, expose custom metrics, or make calls to external notification systems.
```

Consistent target audience, clarify that you _can_ do that stuff and that it's not just a "goal" (which _may_ not have been reached).
I'd also remove "and more" because it doesn't add any value. You don't want users guessing what this can be used for.

FailureEnrichers are triggered every time an exception is reported at runtime by the JobManager.

> Every FailureEnricher may asynchronously return labels associated with the failure that are then exposed via the JobManager's Rest interface (e.g., a 'type:System' label implying the failure is categorized as a system error).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every FailureEnricher may asynchronously return labels associated with the failure that are then exposed via the JobManager's REST API (e.g., a 'type:System' label implying the failure is categorized as a system error).
```

### Implement a plugin for your custom enricher

To implement a custom FailureEnricher plugin, you need to:

- Add your own FailureEnricher by implementing the {{< gh_link file="/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/core/failure/FailureEnricher.java" name="FailureEnricher" >}} interface.

- Add your own FailureEnricherFactory by implementing the {{< gh_link file="/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/core/failure/FailureEnricherFactory.java" name="FailureEnricherFactory" >}} interface.

- Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricherFactory` which contains the class name of your failure enricher factory class (see [Java Service Loader](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) docs for more details).

> Then, create a jar which includes your `FailureEnricher`, `FailureEnricherFactory`, `META-INF/services/` and all the external dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, create a jar which includes your `FailureEnricher`, `FailureEnricherFactory`, `META-INF/services/` and all external dependencies.
```

Make a directory in `plugins/` of your Flink distribution with an arbitrary name, e.g. "failure-enrichment", and put the jar into this directory.
See [Flink Plugin]({% link deployment/filesystems/plugins.md %}) for more details.

{{< hint warning >}}

> Note that every FailureEnricher should have defined a set of {{< gh_link file="/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/core/failure/FailureEnricher.java" name="output keys" >}} that may be associated with values. This set of keys has to be unique across enrichers otherwise may be ignored.

Reviewer: > otherwise may be ignored

Otherwise _what_ may be ignored?

Reviewer: I don't understand what the implications "ignoring values" is. In practice all that happens if that one enricher would override the label of another one, right? Can we just write that?

Reviewer: oh wow all enrichers that clash in any way are just completely dropped if there is a clash. That doesn't seem to match the documented behavior.

Author: When enrichers output keys overlap, only the first one is loaded and the rest are dropped with an Error message -- that was the meaning of `This set of keys has to be unique across enrichers otherwise may be ignored.` 
Rephrasing

Reviewer: > When enrichers output keys overlap, only the first one is loaded and the rest are dropped with an Error message

That doesn't seem to match `org.apache.flink.runtime.failure.FailureEnricherUtils#filterInvalidEnrichers`. `invalidEnrichers` will contain all enrichers that clashed, and those are all thrown out.

```
        final Set<Class<?>> invalidEnrichers =
                enrichersByKey.entrySet().stream()
                        .filter(entry -> entry.getValue().size() > 1)
                        .flatMap(
                                entry -> {
                                    LOG.warn(
                                            "Following enrichers have have registered duplicate output key [%s] and will be ignored: {}.",
                                            entry.getValue().stream()
                                                    .map(Class::getName)
                                                    .collect(Collectors.joining(", ")));
                                    return entry.getValue().stream();
                                })
                        .collect(Collectors.toSet());
```

`org.apache.flink.runtime.failure.FailureEnricherUtilsTest#testValidatedEnrichersWithInvalidEntries` confirms that, as it uses 3 enrichers, with 2 having clashing keys, and asserting that only 1 is loaded.

Author: You are right, that was the initial logic that we then reworked before merging.
Updating README accordingly.

{{< /hint >}}

FailureEnricherFactory example:

``` java
public class TestFailureEnricherFactory implements FailureEnricherFactory {

   @Override
   public FailureEnricher createFailureEnricher(Configuration conf) {
        return new CustomEnricher();
   }
}
```

FailureEnricher example:

``` java
public class CustomEnricher implements FailureEnricher {
    private final Set<String> outputKeys;
    
    public CustomEnricher() {
        this.outputKeys = Collections.singleton("labelKey");
    }

    @Override
    public Set<String> getOutputKeys() {
        return outputKeys;
    }

    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<Map<String, String>> processFailure(
            Throwable cause, Context context) {
        return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(Collections.singletonMap("labelKey", "labelValue"));
    }
}
```

### Configuration

> JobManager loads FailureEnricher plugins at startup. To make sure your FailureEnrichers are loaded:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JobManager loads FailureEnricher plugins at startup. To make sure your FailureEnrichers are loaded:
```

> * All class names should be defined as part of {{< javadoc file="org/apache/flink/configuration/JobManagerOptions.html#FAILURE_ENRICHERS_LIST" name="jobmanager.failure-enrichers">}} configuration.

Reviewer: Feels weird to have a list containing a single item.

Reviewer: Please link to the config docs instead of the javadocs.

  If this configuration is empty, NO enrichers will be started. Example:
```

>     jobmanager.failure-enrichers = org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher

Reviewer: This would be more complete if the CustomEnricher example included a `package`

Reviewer: Did you miss this one?

Author: `org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure` is the package? Not sure what you are referring to here

Reviewer: Where did you add the package to the example implementation?

Author: fixed

```

### Validation

To validate that your FailureEnricher is loaded, you can check the JobManager logs for the following line:
```
    Found failure enricher org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher at jar:file:/path/to/flink/plugins/failure-enrichment/flink-test-plugin.jar!/org/apache/flink/test/plugin/jar/failure/CustomEnricher.class
```

Moreover, you can query the JobManager's Rest API using the following endpoint:
```

>     http://localhost:8081/jobs/<jobid>/exceptions

Reviewer: You could link to the REST API docs instead.

Flink provides a pluggable failure enricher interface for users to register their custom logic.
The goal is to give flexibility to developers who can now implement their own plugins to categorize job failures, expose custom metrics, make calls to external notification systems, and more.
Failure enrichers are triggered every time an exception is reported at runtime by the job manager.
Every failure enricher may optionally return labels (kv string pairs) associated with the failure that are then exposed via the job manager's Rest interface (e.g., a 'System' tag implying the failure considered as a system error).
For instance, when a Flink runtime failure occurs caused by network error, we can increment the appropriate counter.
With accurate metrics, we now have better insight of platform level metrics e.g., network failures, platform reliability, etc.
The default CountingFailureEnricher just records the failure count and then emits the metric "numJobFailure" for the job.

### Implement a plugin for your custom enricher

To implement a custom plugin for your use-case:

- Add your own FailureEnricher by implementing the `org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricher` interface.

> - Add your own FailureEnricherFactory by implementing the `org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricherFactory` interface.

Reviewer 2: It would be neat to add links into javadocs.

- Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricherFactory`
  which contains the class name of your exception classifier factory class (see the [Java Service Loader](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) docs for more details).

Then, create a jar which includes your `FailureEnricher`, `FailureEnricherFactory`, `META-INF/services/` and all the external dependencies.
Make a directory in `plugins/` of your Flink distribution with an arbitrary name, e.g. "exception-classification", and put the jar into this directory.
See [Flink Plugin]({% link deployment/filesystems/plugins.md %}) for more details.

As a plugin will be loaded in different classloader, log4j is not able to initialized correctly in your plugin. In this case,
you should add the config below in `flink-conf.yaml`:

> - `plugin.classloader.parent-first-patterns.additional: org.slf4j`

Reviewer 2: This feels weird, you shouldn't bundle slf4j in the plugin

Reviewer 2: Also `org.apache.flink.configuration.CoreOptions#PARENT_FIRST_LOGGING_PATTERNS` already contains it

-->

## Custom failure enrichers
Flink provides a pluggable interface for users to register their custom logic and enrich failures with extra metadata labels (string kv pairs).
The goal is to enable developers implement their own failure enrichment plugins to categorize job failures, expose custom metrics, make calls to external notification systems, and more.

FailureEnrichers are triggered every time an exception is reported at runtime by the JobManager.
Every FailureEnricher may asynchronously return labels associated with the failure that are then exposed via the JobManager's Rest interface (e.g., a 'type:System' label implying the failure is categorized as a system error).

### Implement a plugin for your custom enricher

To implement a custom FailureEnricher plugin, you need to:

- Add your own FailureEnricher by implementing the {{< gh_link file="/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/core/failure/FailureEnricher.java" name="FailureEnricher" >}} interface.

- Add your own FailureEnricherFactory by implementing the {{< gh_link file="/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/core/failure/FailureEnricherFactory.java" name="FailureEnricherFactory" >}} interface.

> - Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricherFactory` which contains the class name of your failure enricher factory class (see [Java Service Loader](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) docs for more details).

Reviewer 3: maybe use `https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/util/ServiceLoader.html` is better, now flink has spported jdk17

Reviewer 3: Here I think the user needs to be reminded that the file name must be named `org.apache.flink.core.failure.FailureEnricherFactory`

   @Override
   public FailureEnricher createFailureEnricher(Configuration conf) {
        return new CustomEnricher();
   }
}
```

FailureEnricher example:

``` java
public class CustomEnricher implements FailureEnricher {
    private final Set<String> outputKeys;
    
    public CustomEnricher() {
        this.outputKeys = Collections.singleton("labelKey");
    }

    @Override
    public Set<String> getOutputKeys() {
        return outputKeys;
    }

    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<Map<String, String>> processFailure(
            Throwable cause, Context context) {
        return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(Collections.singletonMap("labelKey", "labelValue"));
    }
}
```

### Configuration

JobManager loads FailureEnricher plugins at startup. To make sure your FailureEnrichers are loaded:
* All class names should be defined as part of {{< javadoc file="org/apache/flink/configuration/JobManagerOptions.html#FAILURE_ENRICHERS_LIST" name="jobmanager.failure-enrichers">}} configuration.
  If this configuration is empty, NO enrichers will be started. Example:
```
    jobmanager.failure-enrichers = org.apache.flink.test.plugin.jar.failure.CustomEnricher

> ```

Reviewer 3: Should we add a chapter here to explain how to confirm that this mechanism is in effect?
